So in this lecture, we're going to
talk about ways to help us interpret
effects when we're studying something
that we don't know too well.
And the idea is simply to compare
things with benchmark effects.
So to summarize, here's the problem
that we're interested in.
Here's the real life
data analysis problem.
It's hard to interpret an effect or its
magnitude because it's a newly, it's hard
to interpret an effect or its magnitude
because its a newly studied construct.
And the solution I'm going to propose is,
contrast the effect or the P value, or
the effect size, with the level of
significance, with a known construct.
So let me give you an example,
just to kind of frame the discussion.
So a friend of mine named Brian Schwarz,
he's in environmental health here, wrote a
paper called, past adult lead exposure is
linked to neurodegeneration
as measured by brain MRI.
And what they found is, that unadjusted
effect estimate of -1.141 milliliters of
brain volume per 1 microgram of lead
per gram of bone mineral increase.
Which is a hard thing to interpret,
but it's basically saying you'll lose
about 1.14 milliliters of brain volume for
every 1 unit increase in lead exposure.
He was looking at people who worked
in lead manufacturing plants.
They are worried that the chronic
exposure to lead was causing
accelerated brain volume decline beyond
that would occur in normal aging.
Okay, so
how do would interpret this -1.14?
We just gave the interpretation.
Right?
It had the units of the problem.
However, there is the problem that I
still kinda don't know what that means.
So here's the idea of putting it into
a context with a related phenomenon.
So just to remind us, and here I'm just
looking at one version of the effect.
The paper, of course,
really drilled down in this problem, so
that the one version of this effect,
the unadjusted effect was negative 1.41.
So, a decrease in brain volume
as lead exposure increases.
I don't understand that effect terribly
well because I'm not an expert on lead.
But I do know some things
about normal aging.
Normal aging, over the age of 40,
results in about a half a percent of
decline in brain volume per year.
Okay.
So, I know it's roughly about that,
maybe that estimate's a little high,
but let's say it's roughly about that.
So, if I take that half a percent
decline in brain volume per year, and
I look at the average brain volume from
Brian's study, then I can figure out
that 1.41 decrease is roughly equivalent
to about about 20% of a year.
So basically, we're saying this effect,
that a one unit increase in lead,
in lead exposure results
in brain volume loss.
That's about the same amount of
volume loss that people experience
in about 20% of the year
over the age of 40.
So to me, that's more interpretable,
because I understand, in this case,
because I understand about healthy brain
aging, because I work in the area.
And so, what I'm trying to convince you
to do, is when you're looking at this
complicated effect measure,
put it in to compare it,
put it into a contrast with something
that you're very familiar with.
In this case, I'm very familiar
with normal, healthy aging.
I'm not too familiar with lead exposure
and its effects on the brain, so
I'm going to perform this comparison.
And this is a highly powerful technique
for bringing and explaining concepts,
and its especially useful when
you put these new constructs
into the frame of something that
everyone in the room is familiar with.
So again, this is a technique that is
used all the time in epidemiology and
public health and biostatistics, and
I suggest you try it out in your studies.